---
title: 1. What is Deb package
updated: 2024-10-25 20:59:45Z
created: 2024-09-15 17:01:13Z
latitude: 12.97159870
longitude: 77.59456270
altitude: 0.0000
---

# What is DEB package

- A DEB package is a software package format used by Debian-based operating systems, such as Debian itself, Ubuntu, and their derivatives.
- The DEB format is used to distribute and install software applications and libraries in a way that is easy for users and system administrators to manage.
- File Extension is `.deb`

---

## Key features of DEB Package

1. **File Structure**: DEB package contains the Compiled binaries, libraries, and other files needed for the software to run, along with metadata that decribes the package, such as version, name, dependencies, and installation scripts.
2. **Dependency Managment**: DEB packages can specify the dependencies required. allowing the package managment system to automatically install required softwares.
3. **Package Mangement Tools**: DEB systems uses package management tools like `dpkg (Debian Package)` and higher-level tools like `apt (Advanced Package tools)` to install remove and manage DEB packages.

---

### Installation

1. **Unpack Only**

   `--unpack`: The files contained in the package will be extracted to their designated locations on the filesystem, but the package will not be fully installed or configured.

   ```bash
   sudo dpkg --unpack package_name.deb
   ```

   > This command is often used when you want to manually inspect the contents of a package or when you are troubleshooting installation issues.

1. This Unpacked files can be removed by using autoremove command

   ```bash
   sudo apt autoremove
   ```

1. After `--unpack`; use `--configure` to complete the installation.

   ```bash
   sudo dpkg configure package-name
   ```

1. **Instal and Configure(Full installation)**:

   ```bash
   sudo dpkg -i package_name.deb
   ```

   ```bash
   sudo apt install package_name.deb
   ```

---

### dpkg commands

- List installed packages

  ```bash
  dpkg -l
  ```

- Check package status

  ```bash
  dpkg -s package_name
  ```

- List files in a package

  ```bash
  dpkg -L package_name
  ```

- To know which package installed specific file

  ```bash
  dpkg -S /path/to/file
  ```

---

### Handling Dependencies

If `dpkg` used to install a package and encounter dependency issues, you can resolve them by running

```bash
sudo apt-get install -f
```

---

### Remove Packages

- To remove a package while keeping its configuration files:

  ```bash
  sudo dpkg --remove package_name
  ```

- To completely remove a package along with its configuration files:

  ```bash
  sudo dpkg --purge package_name
  ```

> If you prefer a graphical interface, there are several GUI tools available for managing packages, such as Synaptic Package Manager or the Software Center in Ubuntu.
>
> For more detailed information about dpkg, you can refer to the manual pages by running:
>
> ```bash
> man dpkg
> ```

---

### System Log

If you encounter issues during installation or removal of packages, check system logs for error messages. You can view logs using:

```bash
less /var/log/dpkg.log
```

---

## Referrences

[Official manual](https://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/maint-guide/index.en.html) for Debian Package creation.

---

[Next -->\_2. Creating a simple DEB package](2.%20Creating%20a%20simple%20DEB%20package.md)
